docs/extending/creation-callbacks.adoc, before:

= creationCallbacks

Add remove, or modify existing fields, their description, types and interfaces. 

== Introduction

creationCallbacks are invoked during the GraphQL schema generation - every time Guillotine or an application extending Guilltine is started or stopped.


Important to remember:

- Can only be defined for <<types#, types>> and <<interfaces#, interfaces>>.
+
NOTE: field renaming is not supported.
+
- May be invoked in a different order from what is defined in the `creationCallbacks` property.
- If you add or modify some fields to an interface in the creation callback, you must also do that for all implementations. Otherwise, you will get an error during schema generation.
- If you modify some field, make sure that you implement correct data fetcher in the <<./resolvers#,resolvers>> section. Otherwise, you can get an error during query execution.

WARNING: *Conflicts*. Multiple applications may define creationCallbacks. Conflicts between these may lead to schema generation errors or query errors.

NOTE: It is *NOT recommended* to make modification to the standard fields of the `HeadlessCMS` type. But if you have to do it then make sure that it will not introduce conflicts and side effects.

== Usage

This property must be an object with the following structure:

[source,javascript]
----
creationCallbacks: {
    <GraphQLTypeName>: function (params) {
        // if you want to add new fields
        params.addFields({
            <newFieldName>: {
                type: <GraphQLType>,
                args: {
                    <argName>: <GraphQLType>,
                    // the rest of arguments definitions ...
                },
            },
        });

        // if you want to remove existing fields
        params.removeFields([
             "fieldName 1",
             "filedName 2",
             // the rest of fieldName ...
        ]);

        // If you want to modify existing fields.
        // Take aware that all arguments will be rewritten by new arguments.
        // If type or args are not provided then will be used type and args from original field.
        params.modifyFields({
            <existingFieldName>: {
                type: <GraphQLType>,
                args: {
                    <argName>: <GraphQLType>,
                    // the rest of arguments definitions ...
                },
            },
        });

        // If you want to change description
        params.setDescription("New description");

        // If you want to add or remove some interfaces to object.
        // Take aware that interfaces will be rewritten by new array of interfaces.
        // Also, developer is responseble for implmentation of interface, do not forget to add all required fields.
        params.setInterfaces([
            <GraphQLInterfaceType or GraphQLReferenceType>
        ]);
    },
    // the rest of creation callback definition ...
}
----

For example:

[source,javascript]
----
creationCallbacks: {
    MyCustomType: function (params) {
        params.addFields({
            extraField: {
                type: graphQL.GraphQLString,
            }
        });

        params.removeFields([
            "fieldToRemove1",
            "fieldToRemove2",
        ]);

        params.modifyFields({
          fieldToModify: {
            type: graphQL.GraphQLString,
          }
        });
    },

}
----

To know how to set or override data fetcher for a field you can refer to the <<./resolvers#,resolvers>> section.

Commit message:

Document `graphql.extensions.modifyUknownField` #791 (#792)
Document `graphql.extensions.modifyUknownField` #791

docs/extending/creation-callbacks.adoc, after:

= creationCallbacks

Add remove, or modify existing fields, their description, types and interfaces.

== Introduction

creationCallbacks are invoked during the GraphQL schema generation - every time Guillotine or an application extending Guilltine is started or stopped.


Important to remember:

- Can only be defined for <<types#, types>> and <<interfaces#, interfaces>>.
+
NOTE: field renaming is not supported.
+
- May be invoked in a different order from what is defined in the `creationCallbacks` property.
- If you add or modify some fields to an interface in the creation callback, you must also do that for all implementations. Otherwise, you will get an error during schema generation.
- If you modify some field, make sure that you implement correct data fetcher in the <<./resolvers#,resolvers>> section. Otherwise, you can get an error during query execution.

WARNING: *Conflicts*. Multiple applications may define creationCallbacks. Conflicts between these may lead to schema generation errors or query errors.

NOTE: It is *NOT recommended* to make modification to the standard fields of the `HeadlessCMS` type. But if you have to do it then make sure that it will not introduce conflicts and side effects.

== Usage

This property must be an object with the following structure:

[source,javascript]
----
creationCallbacks: {
    <GraphQLTypeName>: function (params) {
        // if you want to add new fields
        params.addFields({
            <newFieldName>: {
                type: <GraphQLType>,
                args: {
                    <argName>: <GraphQLType>,
                    // the rest of arguments definitions ...
                },
            },
        });

        // if you want to remove existing fields
        params.removeFields([
             "fieldName 1",
             "filedName 2",
             // the rest of fieldName ...
        ]);

        // If you want to modify existing fields.
        // Take aware that all arguments will be rewritten by new arguments.
        // If type or args are not provided then will be used type and args from original field.
        params.modifyFields({
            <existingFieldName>: {
                type: <GraphQLType>,
                args: {
                    <argName>: <GraphQLType>,
                    // the rest of arguments definitions ...
                },
            },
        });

        // If you want to change description
        params.setDescription("New description");

        // If you want to add or remove some interfaces to object.
        // Take aware that interfaces will be rewritten by new array of interfaces.
        // Also, developer is responseble for implmentation of interface, do not forget to add all required fields.
        params.setInterfaces([
            <GraphQLInterfaceType or GraphQLReferenceType>
        ]);
    },
    // the rest of creation callback definition ...
}
----

NOTE: By default, Guillotine will throw an error if it tries to modify an unknown field. You can customise this behaviour by setting the `graphql.extensions.modifyUnknownField` property in the <<../configuration#, configuration>>.


For example:

[source,javascript]
----
creationCallbacks: {
    MyCustomType: function (params) {
        params.addFields({
            extraField: {
                type: graphQL.GraphQLString,
            }
        });

        params.removeFields([
            "fieldToRemove1",
            "fieldToRemove2",
        ]);

        params.modifyFields({
          fieldToModify: {
            type: graphQL.GraphQLString,
          }
        });
    },

}
----

To know how to set or override data fetcher for a field you can refer to the <<./resolvers#,resolvers>> section.
