docs/upgrade.adoc, before:

= Upgrade Notes


== Global Schema

The Guillotine API is now Global, meaning the schema will include types and extensions for all installed applications, regardless of the context you use to access the API.

== Subscriptions

Due to limited interest and use, `Subscriptions` have been removed from Guillotine 7. 

Guillotine 7 does not provide a way to add custom subscriptions at the moment. If you need subscriptions, this will require you to build a custom API, consider using the Guillotine 6 code as a foundation.

== Deprecated fields

The `query` and `queryConnection` fields are deprecated. Use `queryDsl` and `queryDslConnection` instead.

== Url fields

The `params` argument of URL field (i,e, pageUrl, imageUrl, attachmentUrl and mediaUrl) were previously of type `String`, but are now of type `JSON`.

* Old way: `pageUrl(params: String)`

[source,javascript]
----
{
  guillotine {
    get(key: "/path/to/content") {
      pageUrl(params: "{\"a\": [1, 4], \"b\": 2, \"c\": 3 }")
    }
  }
}
----
* New way: `pageUrl(params: JSON)`

[source,javascript]
----
{
  guillotine {
    get(key: "/path/to/content") {
      pageUrl(params: {a: [1, 4], b: 2, c: 3})
    }
  }
}
----

== Guillotine library

Guillotine 7 now supports <<extending#, dynamically extending and augmenting of the API>>. As a result the Guillotine library has been discontinued.

If you have been using the Guillotine library, and want to keep similar funcitonality with v7, you will have to migrate to the new way of extending.

Legacy options like `allowPaths` and `subscriptionEventTypes` are no longer supported either.

NOTE: Remember, you can still install Guillotine 7, and keep your old library-based application in the same Enonic instance.


=== Migrating

In order to migrate your code, you will have to:

. Create a new application or use an existing one, where you should create `guillotine.js` file in the `src/main/resources/guillotine` folder of your project.
. This file must contain a function that returns an object with structure which described <<extending#, here>>.
. Your schema will be available at the POST `/site/<project-name>/<branch-name>` endpoint. More information <<setup#endpoints, here>>.

Let see important changes in the new version of the Guillotine application related with `creationCallbacks`:

- In Guillotine application you can not define `dataFetcher` directly in `creationCallbacks`, you must use `resolvers` node instead.  That done to separate model from logic.
- To add, modify or remove fields you must use `addFileds`, `modifyFields` and `removeFields` functions of the `params` object respectively.
- To set description of the type you must use `setDescription` function of the `params` object.
- To set interfaces of the type you must use `setInterfaces` function of the `params` object.
- You can not rename field anymore.

More information about `creationCallbacks` can be found <<extending/creation-callbacks#, here>>.

=== Example of migration

Now let see the example of migration from the Guillotine library to the Guillotine application.

Let's assume that we have the following `creationCallbacks` in our code when using the Guillotine library:

[source, javascript]
----
const authLib = require('/lib/xp/auth');
const guillotineLib = require('/lib/guillotine');
const graphQlLib = require('/lib/graphql');

const schema = guillotineLib.createSchema({
    creationCallbacks: {
        'com_enonic_app_myapp_Author_Data': function(context, params){
            params.fields.fullName = { // <1>
                 type: graphQlLib.GraphQLString,
                 resolve: function (env) {
                     return env.source.firstName + ' ' + env.source.lastName;
                 }
            };

            params.fields.email.resolve = function (env) { // <2>
                return authLib.hasRole('system.admin') ? env.source.email : null;
            };

            delete params.fields.birthDate; // <3>
        },
    }
});
----

In this example we made the following changes:

<1> Added a new `fullName` field to the `com_enonic_app_myapp_Author_Data` type. Pay attention that the declaration of the field is done by declaring a data fetcher.
<2> Override the default data fetcher with our own data fetcher containing custom logic.
<3> Removed the `birthDate` field from `com_enonic_app_myapp_Author_Data` type.

Now, let's see how to migrate this code using `extensions` from the Guillotine application:

First what we need to create a `guillotine.js` file in the `src/main/resources/guillotine` folder. Then we can make the same changes for `com_enonic_app_myapp_Author_Data` type, but in the different way.

[source, javascript]
----
const authLib = require('/lib/xp/auth');

exports.extensions = function (graphQL) { // <1>
    return {
        creationCallbacks: {
            com_enonic_app_myapp_Author_Data: function (params) { // <2>
                params.addFields({
                    fullName: { // <3>
                        type: graphQL.GraphQLString,
                    }
                });

                params.removeFields(['birthDate']); // <4>
            },
        },
        resolvers: {
            com_enonic_app_myapp_Author_Data: { // <5>
                fullName: function (env) {
                    return env.source.firstName + ' ' + env.source.lastName;
                },
                email: function (env) {
                    return authLib.hasRole('system.admin') ? env.source.email : null;
                }
            }
        },
    }
};
----

This code has the following important things:

<1> Inside the `extenstions` function we will return object with `creationCallbacks` and `resolvers` properties.
<2> To make changes for `com_enonic_app_myapp_Author_Data` type in the `creationCallbacks` we need to add the property as named function `com_enonic_app_myapp_Author_Data` which has the `params` argument. Using params object we can add, modify and remove fields, set description and override interfaces for type.
<3> Then we add the `fullName` field with `String` type and without arguments.
<4> Then we remove `birthDate` field. The `removeFields` function applies an arrays of string with field names which must be removed.
<5> Then to set a data fetcher for `fullName` and `email` fields we must use the `resolvers` property of the returned object. Where in the same way, inside the `resolvers` property we must define the `com_enonic_app_myapp_Author_Data` object with respectively properties as field names and implement data fetcher functions.

That it, our migration is done.

Visit the <<extending#,extensions documentation>> for more details.

Commit message:

Docs 7.1 (#798)
* Document siteConfig #775

* Update docs/upgrade.adoc

Co-authored-by: Alan Semenov <alansemenov@users.noreply.github.com>

* Document siteKey for Guillotine 7.1 #786 (#787)

Document siteKey for Guillotine 7.1 #786

* Update upgrade notes for Guillotine 7 (#790)

Update upgrade notes for Guillotine 7 #783

* Update docs generation flow

* Document `graphql.extensions.modifyUknownField` #791 (#792)

Document `graphql.extensions.modifyUknownField` #791

* Fix mistakes

* Fix mistakes

* Document Guillotine type definitions on NPM #796

---------

Co-authored-by: Alan Semenov <alansemenov@users.noreply.github.com>
Co-authored-by: alansemenov <ase@enonic.com>

docs/upgrade.adoc, after:

= Upgrade Notes


== Global Schema

The Guillotine API is now Global, meaning the schema will include types and extensions for all installed applications, regardless of the context you use to access the API.

== Subscriptions

Due to limited interest and use, `Subscriptions` have been removed from Guillotine 7.

Guillotine 7 does not provide a way to add custom subscriptions at the moment. If you need subscriptions, this will require you to build a custom API, consider using the Guillotine 6 code as a foundation.

== Deprecated fields

The `query` and `queryConnection` fields are deprecated. Use `queryDsl` and `queryDslConnection` instead.

== Url fields

The `params` argument of URL field (i,e, pageUrl, imageUrl, attachmentUrl and mediaUrl) were previously of type `String`, but are now of type `JSON`.

* Old way: `pageUrl(params: String)`

[source,javascript]
----
{
  guillotine {
    get(key: "/path/to/content") {
      pageUrl(params: "{\"a\": [1, 4], \"b\": 2, \"c\": 3 }")
    }
  }
}
----
* New way: `pageUrl(params: JSON)`

[source,javascript]
----
{
  guillotine {
    get(key: "/path/to/content") {
      pageUrl(params: {a: [1, 4], b: 2, c: 3})
    }
  }
}
----

== Site Configuration

It is no longer possible to obtain the `siteConfig` from the `dataAsJson` and `site` fields of the `Content` type, as well as from the `dataAsJson` field of the `portal_Site` type. If you need to retrieve the site configuration, please use the `getSite` or `getSiteConfig` functions from the https://developer.enonic.com/docs/xp/stable/api/lib-content#getsiteconfig[Content Lib].

== Guillotine library

Guillotine 7 now supports <<extending#, dynamically extending and augmenting of the API>>. As a result the Guillotine library has been discontinued.

If you have been using the Guillotine library, and want to keep similar functionality with v7, you will have to migrate to the new way of <<extending#,extending>>.

Legacy options like `allowPaths` and `subscriptionEventTypes` are no longer supported either.

NOTE: Remember, you can still install Guillotine 7, and keep your old library-based application in the same Enonic instance.


=== Migrating

In order to migrate your code, you will have to:

. Create a new application or use an existing one, where you should create `guillotine.js` file in the `src/main/resources/guillotine` folder of your project.
. This file must contain a function that returns an object with structure which described <<extending#, here>>.
. Your schema will be available at the POST `/site/<project-name>/<branch-name>` endpoint. More information <<setup#endpoints, here>>.

Let see important changes in the new version of the Guillotine application related with `creationCallbacks`:

- In Guillotine application you can not define `dataFetcher` directly in `creationCallbacks`, you must use `resolvers` node instead.  That done to separate model from logic.
- To add, modify or remove fields you must use `addFileds`, `modifyFields` and `removeFields` functions of the `params` object respectively.
- To set description of the type you must use `setDescription` function of the `params` object.
- To set interfaces of the type you must use `setInterfaces` function of the `params` object.
- You can not rename field anymore.

More information about `creationCallbacks` can be found <<extending/creation-callbacks#, here>>.

=== Example of migration

Now let see the example of migration from the Guillotine library to the Guillotine application.

Let's assume that we have the following `creationCallbacks` in our code when using the Guillotine library:

[source, javascript]
----
const authLib = require('/lib/xp/auth');
const guillotineLib = require('/lib/guillotine');
const graphQlLib = require('/lib/graphql');

const schema = guillotineLib.createSchema({
    creationCallbacks: {
        'com_enonic_app_myapp_Author_Data': function(context, params){
            params.fields.fullName = { // <1>
                 type: graphQlLib.GraphQLString,
                 resolve: function (env) {
                     return env.source.firstName + ' ' + env.source.lastName;
                 }
            };

            params.fields.email.resolve = function (env) { // <2>
                return authLib.hasRole('system.admin') ? env.source.email : null;
            };

            delete params.fields.birthDate; // <3>
        },
    }
});
----

In this example we made the following changes:

<1> Added a new `fullName` field to the `com_enonic_app_myapp_Author_Data` type. Pay attention that the declaration of the field is done by declaring a data fetcher.
<2> Override the default data fetcher with our own data fetcher containing custom logic.
<3> Removed the `birthDate` field from `com_enonic_app_myapp_Author_Data` type.

Now, let's see how to migrate this code using `extensions` from the Guillotine application:

First what we need to create a `guillotine.js` file in the `src/main/resources/guillotine` folder. Then we can make the same changes for `com_enonic_app_myapp_Author_Data` type, but in the different way.

[source, javascript]
----
const authLib = require('/lib/xp/auth');

exports.extensions = function (graphQL) { // <1>
    return {
        creationCallbacks: {
            com_enonic_app_myapp_Author_Data: function (params) { // <2>
                params.addFields({
                    fullName: { // <3>
                        type: graphQL.GraphQLString,
                    }
                });

                params.removeFields(['birthDate']); // <4>
            },
        },
        resolvers: {
            com_enonic_app_myapp_Author_Data: { // <5>
                fullName: function (env) {
                    return env.source.firstName + ' ' + env.source.lastName;
                },
                email: function (env) {
                    return authLib.hasRole('system.admin') ? env.source.email : null;
                }
            }
        },
    }
};
----

This code has the following important things:

<1> Inside the `extenstions` function we will return object with `creationCallbacks` and `resolvers` properties.
<2> To make changes for `com_enonic_app_myapp_Author_Data` type in the `creationCallbacks` we need to add the property as named function `com_enonic_app_myapp_Author_Data` which has the `params` argument. Using params object we can add, modify and remove fields, set description and override interfaces for type.
<3> Then we add the `fullName` field with `String` type and without arguments.
<4> Then we remove `birthDate` field. The `removeFields` function applies an arrays of string with field names which must be removed.
<5> Then to set a data fetcher for `fullName` and `email` fields we must use the `resolvers` property of the returned object. Where in the same way, inside the `resolvers` property we must define the `com_enonic_app_myapp_Author_Data` object with respectively properties as field names and implement data fetcher functions.

That it, our migration is done.

Visit the <<extending#,extensions documentation>> for more details.
